Experimental Tests
==================

.. note::

   Experimental tests may be moved to the default test section at some point.
   As that time their name would be changed, and the old name will become
   deprecated (though for a time, just as a deprecation warning).

test_all_models_register_on_metadata
------------------------------------
Diffs the set of tables registered by alembic's :code:`env.py` versus the set
of full tables we find throughout your models package/module.

Enabling all_models_register_on_metadata (TL;DR)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
You can either enable this test with no configuration, which will attempt to
identify the source module from which the :code:`env.py` is loading its
:code:`MetaData` and automatically search in that module/package

.. code-block:: toml
   :caption: pyproject.toml/setup.cfg/pytest.ini

   # pyproject.toml
   [tool.pytest.ini_options]
   pytest_alembic_include_experimental = 'all_models_register_on_metadata'

   # or setup.cfg/pytest.ini
   [pytest]
   pytest_alembic_include_experimental = all_models_register_on_metadata


Or you can manually import and execute the test somewhere in your own tests.
Using this mechanism, you would be able to circumvent the automatic detection
and provide the module/package directly.


.. code-block:: python

   from pytest_alembic import tests

   def test_all_models_register_on_metadata(alembic_runner):
      tests.experimental.test_all_models_register_on_metadata(alembic_runner, 'package.models')


How all_models_register_on_metadata works
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
The problem this test attempts to solve is best described with an example. Consider
the following package structure:

.. code-block::

   package/
     models/
        __init__.py
        foo.py
        bar.py
        baz.py
     other_packages/
     other_modules.py

   migrations/
      env.py

Next, a typical package containing a ``MetaData`` or ``declarative_base`` and models or tables. Yours may look superficially different than ours, but you will almost
certainly define your base, and either define or import any models or tables
after its definition.

.. code-block:: python
   :caption: __init__.py

   import sqlalchemy
   from sqlalchemy import Column, types
   from sqlalchemy.ext.declarative import declarative_base

   Base = declarative_base()

   from package.models import (
      foo,
      bar,
   )

The specifics of the table definitions are not particularly important, so we'll
omit ``bar.py`` and ``baz.py`` (imagine they're essentially identical!), but here's
``foo.py``.

.. code-block:: python
   :caption: foo.py

   from package.models import Base

   class Foo(Base):
    __tablename__ = "foo"

    id = Column(types.Integer(), autoincrement=True, primary_key=True)


Finally, an excerpt from what is commonly autogenerated by running
:code:`alembic init`.

.. code-block:: python
   :caption: env.py

   ...
   from package.models import Base
   target_metadata = Base.metadata
   ...
   with connectable.connect() as connection:
       context.configure(connection=connection, target_metadata=target_metadata)
       ...

And now we get to the crux of the problem.

A keen eye may have noticed that ``baz`` is not being imported above, and that's
not a mistake! Elsewhere in your code (:code:`other_packages/other_modules`, for
example) you will likely import all of your models at **some** point. So when you go
to actually use the models, you may not even notice that there is anything wrong.

However as far as alembic is concerned:

- It will load the :code:`env.py`

- ``env.py`` only imports ``package.models`` (which notably omits :code:`package.models.baz`!)

- ``Base``/``Base.metadata`` will therefore only have ``foo`` and ``bar`` tables
  registered on it.

So when you go to run ``alembic revision --autogenerate``, it will be unaware of the
"baz" table and either omit its creation or suggest it be dropped if you had already
created it.

This test is meant to be a lint against such scenarios and will fail in any case
where there is no direct import of any tables defined on a `MetaData` during the
course of executing the :code:`env.py` through alembic.

.. note::

   The original inspiration for this test was actually a refactor which changed
   some pre-existing imports around.

   This lead to an **already created** table no longer being incidentally imported
   (somewhere **else** in the codebase!) during the normal course of importing
   our equivalent of ``package.models``.

   This immediately resulted in an ``--autogenerate`` suggesting that the table
   be dropped, since it was alembic assumes you've deleted the model entirely!


test_downgrade_leaves_no_trace
------------------------------
Attempts to ensure that the downgrade for every migration precisely undoes
the changes performed in the upgrade.

Enabling downgrade_leaves_no_trace (TL;DR)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
.. code-block:: toml
   :caption: pyproject.toml/setup.cfg/pytest.ini

   # pyproject.toml
   [tool.pytest.ini_options]
   pytest_alembic_include_experimental = 'downgrade_leaves_no_trace'

   # or setup.cfg/pytest.ini
   [pytest]
   pytest_alembic_include_experimental = downgrade_leaves_no_trace


Or you can manually import and execute the test somewhere in your own tests.
Using this mechanism, you would be able to circumvent the automatic detection
and provide the module/package directly.


.. code-block:: python

   from pytest_alembic import tests

   def test_downgrade_leaves_no_trace(alembic_runner):
      tests.experimental.test_downgrade_leaves_no_trace(alembic_runner)


How downgrade_leaves_no_trace works
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
This test works by attempting to produce two autogenerated migrations.

1. The first is the comparison between the original state of the database before the
   given migration's upgrade occurs, and the `MetaData` produced by having performed
   the upgrade.

   This should approximate the autogenerated migration that alembic
   would have generated to produce your upgraded database state itself.

2. The 2nd is the comparison between the state of the database after having
   performed the upgrade -> downgrade cycle for this revision, and the same
   `MetaData` used in the first comparison.

   This should approximate what alembic would have autogenerated if you
   **actual** performed the downgrade on your database.

In the event these two autogenerations do not match, it implies that your
upgrade -> downgrade cycle produces a database state which is different
(enough for alembic to detect) from the state of the database without having
performed the migration at all.

.. note::

   This isn't perfect! Alembic autogeneration will not detect many
   kinds of changes! If you encounter some scenario in which this does not
   detect a change you'd expect it to, alembic already has extensive ability
   to customize and extend the autogeneration capabilities.
